Generative ai and LLM's

What are large language models and how are they trained?
What is prompt engineering and why is it important in generative AI?
How do large language models generate creative text outputs?
What is the role of fine-tuning in adapting language models to specific use cases?
How can you deploy large language models to solve business and social tasks?
What is the difference between a prompt and a completion in the context of language models?
Can you explain the concept of inference in the context of generative AI?
What are some use cases of large language models in natural language generation?
How do you interact with language models using prompts?
Can you provide an example of a prompt and its corresponding completion generated by a language model?


Okay, let's get started, in this lesson, we're going to set the scene. We'll talk about large language models, their use cases, how the models work, prompt engineering, how to make creative text outputs, and outline a project lifecycle for generative AI projects. Given your interest in this course, it's probably safe to say that you've had a chance to try out a generative AI tool or would like to. Whether it be a chat bot, generating images from text, or using a plugin to help you develop code, what you see in these tools is a machine that is capable of creating content that mimics or approximates human ability. Generative AI is a subset of traditional machine learning. And the machine learning models that underpin generative AI have learned these abilities by finding statistical patterns in massive datasets of content that was originally generated by humans. Large language models have been trained on trillions of words over many weeks and months, and with large amounts of compute power. These foundation models, as we call them, with billions of parameters, exhibit emergent properties beyond language alone, and researchers are unlocking their ability to break down complex tasks, reason, and problem solve. Here are a collection of foundation models, sometimes called base models, and their relative size in terms of their parameters. You'll cover these parameters in a little more detail later on, but for now, think of them as the model's memory. And the more parameters a model has, the more memory, and as it turns out, the more sophisticated the tasks it can perform. Throughout this course, we'll represent LLMs with these purple circles, and in the labs, you'll make use of a specific open source model, flan-T5, to carry out language tasks. By either using these models as they are or by applying fine tuning techniques to adapt them to your specific use case, you can rapidly build customized solutions without the need to train a new model from scratch. Now, while generative AI models are being created for multiple modalities, including images, video, audio, and speech, in this course you'll focus on large language models and their uses in natural language generation. You will see how they are built and trained, how you can interact with them via text known as prompts. And how to fine tune models for your use case and data, and how you can deploy them with applications to solve your business and social tasks. The way you interact with language models is quite different than other machine learning and programming paradigms. In those cases, you write computer code with formalized syntax to interact with libraries and APIs. In contrast, large language models are able to take natural language or human written instructions and perform tasks much as a human would. The text that you pass to an LLM is known as a prompt. The space or memory that is available to the prompt is called the context window, and this is typically large enough for a few thousand words, but differs from model to model. In this example, you ask the model to determine where Ganymede is located in the solar system. The prompt is passed to the model, the model then predicts the next words, and because your prompt contained a question, this model generates an answer. The output of the model is called a completion, and the act of using the model to generate text is known as inference. The completion is comprised of the text contained in the original prompt, followed by the generated text. You can see that this model did a good job of answering your question. It correctly identifies that Ganymede is a moon of Jupiter and generates a reasonable answer to your question stating that the moon is located within Jupiter's orbit. You'll see lots of examples of prompts and completions in this style throughout the course.
----------------------------------------------------------------------
LLm's use cases and tasks
What are some tasks that can be accomplished using Large Language Models (LLMs) and generative AI?
How can LLMs be used for text generation beyond chatbots?
What is the concept behind next word prediction and how is it used in LLMs?
How can LLMs be used for translation tasks?
What is named entity recognition and how can LLMs be used for this task?
How can LLMs be augmented by connecting them to external data sources or using external APIs?
What is the relationship between the scale of LLMs and their language understanding?
How can smaller models be fine-tuned to perform well on specific tasks?
What is the architecture that powers LLMs and how has it contributed to their rapid increase in capability?
What will be covered in Week 2 and Week 3 of the course?

You could be forgiven for thinking that LLMs and generative AI are focused on chats tasks. After all, chatbots are highly visible and getting a lot of attention. Next word prediction is the base concept behind a number of different capabilities, starting with a basic chatbot. However, you can use this conceptually simple technique for a variety of other tasks within text generation. For example, you can ask a model to write an essay based on a prompt, to summarize conversations where you provide the dialogue as part of your prompt and the model uses this data along with its understanding of natural language to generate a summary. You can use models for a variety of translation tasks from traditional translation between two different languages, such as French and German, or English and Spanish. Or to translate natural language to machine code. For example, you could ask a model to write some Python code that will return the mean of every column in a DataFrame and the model will generate code that you can pass to an interpreter. You can use LLMs to carry out smaller, focused tasks like information retrieval. In this example, you ask the model to identify all of the people and places identified in a news article. This is known as named entity recognition, a word classification. The understanding of knowledge encoded in the model's parameters allows it to correctly carry out this task and return the requested information to you. Finally, an area of active development is augmenting LLMs by connecting them to external data sources or using them to invoke external APIs. You can use this ability to provide the model with information it doesn't know from its pre-training and to enable your model to power interactions with the real-world. You'll learn much more about how to do this in week 3 of the course. Developers have discovered that as the scale of foundation models grows from hundreds of millions of parameters to billions, even hundreds of billions, the subjective understanding of language that a model possesses also increases. This language understanding stored within the parameters of the model is what processes, reasons, and ultimately solves the tasks you give it, but it's also true that smaller models can be fine tuned to perform well on specific focused tasks. You'll learn more about how to do this in week 2 of the course. The rapid increase in capability that LLMs have exhibited in the past few years is largely due to the architecture that powers them. Let's move on to the next video to take a closer look.
: Added to Selection. Press [CTRL + S] to save as a note
en
​
----------------------------------------------------------------------
text generation before transformers

What are the limitations of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) when it comes to generative tasks?
How does the transformer architecture differ from RNNs in terms of scalability and processing power?
What is the significance of the paper "Attention is All You Need" in the field of generative AI?
How does the transformer architecture enable models to understand the meaning of words through attention?
Why is it important for generative AI models to have a broader context of the input text?

It's important to note that generative algorithms are not new. Previous generations of language models made use of an architecture called recurrent neural networks or RNNs. RNNs while powerful for their time, were limited by the amount of compute and memory needed to perform well at generative tasks. Let's look at an example of an RNN carrying out a simple next-word prediction generative task. With just one previous words seen by the model, the prediction can't be very good. As you scale the RNN implementation to be able to see more of the preceding words in the text, you have to significantly scale the resources that the model uses. As for the prediction, well, the model failed here. Even though you scale the model, it still hasn't seen enough of the input to make a good prediction. To successfully predict the next word, models need to see more than just the previous few words. Models needs to have an understanding of the whole sentence or even the whole document. The problem here is that language is complex. In many languages, one word can have multiple meanings. These are homonyms. In this case, it's only with the context of the sentence that we can see what kind of bank is meant. Words within a sentence structures can be ambiguous or have what we might call syntactic ambiguity. Take for example this sentence, "The teacher taught the students with the book." Did the teacher teach using the book or did the student have the book, or was it both? How can an algorithm make sense of human language if sometimes we can't? Well in 2017, after the publication of this paper, Attention is All You Need, from Google and the University of Toronto, everything changed. The transformer architecture had arrived. This novel approach unlocked the progress in generative AI that we see today. It can be scaled efficiently to use multi-core GPUs, it can parallel process input data, making use of much larger training datasets, and crucially, it's able to learn to pay attention to the meaning of the words it's processing. And attention is all you need. It's in the title.
----------------------------------------------------------------------
transformers architechture 

What is the key attribute of the transformer architecture that dramatically improved the performance of natural language tasks?
What is the purpose of tokenization in the transformer model?
How does the embedding layer in the transformer model represent words?
What is the role of positional encoding in the transformer model?
What is the purpose of the self-attention layer in the transformer model?
How does the transformer model handle multi-headed self-attention?
What is the output of the fully-connected feed-forward network in the transformer model?
How are the logits from the feed-forward network normalized into probability scores for each word?
Can you explain the concept of attention maps in the transformer model?
How does the transformer model learn the relevance and context of words in a sentence?


Building large language models using the transformer architecture dramatically improved the performance of natural language tasks over the earlier generation of RNNs, and led to an explosion in regenerative capability. The power of the transformer architecture lies in its ability to learn the relevance and context of all of the words in a sentence. Not just as you see here, to each word next to its neighbor, but to every other word in a sentence. To apply attention weights to those relationships so that the model learns the relevance of each word to each other words no matter where they are in the input. This gives the algorithm the ability to learn who has the book, who could have the book, and if it's even relevant to the wider context of the document. These attention weights are learned during LLM training and you'll learn more about this later this week. This diagram is called an attention map and can be useful to illustrate the attention weights between each word and every other word. Here in this stylized example, you can see that the word book is strongly connected with or paying attention to the word teacher and the word student. This is called self-attention and the ability to learn a tension in this way across the whole input significantly approves the model's ability to encode language. Now that you've seen one of the key attributes of the transformer architecture, self-attention, let's cover at a high level how the model works. Here's a simplified diagram of the transformer architecture so that you can focus at a high level on where these processes are taking place. The transformer architecture is split into two distinct parts, the encoder and the decoder. These components work in conjunction with each other and they share a number of similarities. Also, note here, the diagram you see is derived from the original attention is all you need paper. Notice how the inputs to the model are at the bottom and the outputs are at the top, where possible we'll try to remain faithful to this throughout the course. Now, machine-learning models are just big statistical calculators and they work with numbers, not words. So before passing texts into the model to process, you must first tokenize the words. Simply put, this converts the words into numbers, with each number representing a position in a dictionary of all the possible words that the model can work with. You can choose from multiple tokenization methods. For example, token IDs matching two complete words, or using token IDs to represent parts of words. As you can see here. What's important is that once you've selected a tokenizer to train the model, you must use the same tokenizer when you generate text. Now that your input is represented as numbers, you can pass it to the embedding layer. This layer is a trainable vector embedding space, a high-dimensional space where each token is represented as a vector and occupies a unique location within that space. Each token ID in the vocabulary is matched to a multi-dimensional vector, and the intuition is that these vectors learn to encode the meaning and context of individual tokens in the input sequence. Embedding vector spaces have been used in natural language processing for some time, previous generation language algorithms like Word2vec use this concept. Don't worry if you're not familiar with this. You'll see examples of this throughout the course, and there are some links to additional resources in the reading exercises at the end of this week. Looking back at the sample sequence, you can see that in this simple case, each word has been matched to a token ID, and each token is mapped into a vector. In the original transformer paper, the vector size was actually 512, so much bigger than we can fit onto this image. For simplicity, if you imagine a vector size of just three, you could plot the words into a three-dimensional space and see the relationships between those words. You can see now how you can relate words that are located close to each other in the embedding space, and how you can calculate the distance between the words as an angle, which gives the model the ability to mathematically understand language. As you add the token vectors into the base of the encoder or the decoder, you also add positional encoding. The model processes each of the input tokens in parallel. So by adding the positional encoding, you preserve the information about the word order and don't lose the relevance of the position of the word in the sentence. Once you've summed the input tokens and the positional encodings, you pass the resulting vectors to the self-attention layer. Here, the model analyzes the relationships between the tokens in your input sequence. As you saw earlier, this allows the model to attend to different parts of the input sequence to better capture the contextual dependencies between the words. The self-attention weights that are learned during training and stored in these layers reflect the importance of each word in that input sequence to all other words in the sequence. But this does not happen just once, the transformer architecture actually has multi-headed self-attention. This means that multiple sets of self-attention weights or heads are learned in parallel independently of each other. The number of attention heads included in the attention layer varies from model to model, but numbers in the range of 12-100 are common. The intuition here is that each self-attention head will learn a different aspect of language. For example, one head may see the relationship between the people entities in our sentence. Whilst another head may focus on the activity of the sentence. Whilst yet another head may focus on some other properties such as if the words rhyme. It's important to note that you don't dictate ahead of time what aspects of language the attention heads will learn. The weights of each head are randomly initialized and given sufficient training data and time, each will learn different aspects of language. While some attention maps are easy to interpret, like the examples discussed here, others may not be. Now that all of the attention weights have been applied to your input data, the output is processed through a fully-connected feed-forward network. The output of this layer is a vector of logits proportional to the probability score for each and every token in the tokenizer dictionary. You can then pass these logits to a final softmax layer, where they are normalized into a probability score for each word. This output includes a probability for every single word in the vocabulary, so there's likely to be thousands of scores here. One single token will have a score higher than the rest. This is the most likely predicted token. But as you'll see later in the course, there are a number of methods that you can use to vary the final selection from this vector of probabilities.
en
​----------------------------------------------------------------------
generating text with transformers
What are the major components inside the transformer architecture?
How does the prediction process work in a transformer model?
What is the purpose of the encoder and decoder components in the transformer architecture?
What are some examples of encoder-only models and decoder-only models?
How can transformer models be used for sequence-to-sequence tasks?
What is prompt engineering and why is it important in working with transformer models?
How can transformer models be trained to perform classification tasks?
What are some popular transformer models used for text generation tasks?
How can the output from the softmax layer be used to predict the next token in a transformer model?
How can transformer models be used for translation tasks?

At this point, you've seen a high-level overview of some of the major components inside the transformer architecture. But you still haven't seen how the overall prediction process works from end to end. Let's walk through a simple example. In this example, you'll look at a translation task or a sequence-to-sequence task, which incidentally was the original objective of the transformer architecture designers. You'll use a transformer model to translate the French phrase [FOREIGN] into English. First, you'll tokenize the input words using this same tokenizer that was used to train the network. These tokens are then added into the input on the encoder side of the network, passed through the embedding layer, and then fed into the multi-headed attention layers. The outputs of the multi-headed attention layers are fed through a feed-forward network to the output of the encoder. At this point, the data that leaves the encoder is a deep representation of the structure and meaning of the input sequence. This representation is inserted into the middle of the decoder to influence the decoder's self-attention mechanisms. Next, a start of sequence token is added to the input of the decoder. This triggers the decoder to predict the next token, which it does based on the contextual understanding that it's being provided from the encoder. The output of the decoder's self-attention layers gets passed through the decoder feed-forward network and through a final softmax output layer. At this point, we have our first token. You'll continue this loop, passing the output token back to the input to trigger the generation of the next token, until the model predicts an end-of-sequence token. At this point, the final sequence of tokens can be detokenized into words, and you have your output. In this case, I love machine learning. There are multiple ways in which you can use the output from the softmax layer to predict the next token. These can influence how creative you are generated text is. You will look at these in more detail later this week. Let's summarize what you've seen so far. The complete transformer architecture consists of an encoder and decoder components. The encoder encodes input sequences into a deep representation of the structure and meaning of the input. The decoder, working from input token triggers, uses the encoder's contextual understanding to generate new tokens. It does this in a loop until some stop condition has been reached. While the translation example you explored here used both the encoder and decoder parts of the transformer, you can split these components apart for variations of the architecture. Encoder-only models also work as sequence-to-sequence models, but without further modification, the input sequence and the output sequence or the same length. Their use is less common these days, but by adding additional layers to the architecture, you can train encoder-only models to perform classification tasks such as sentiment analysis, BERT is an example of an encoder-only model. Encoder-decoder models, as you've seen, perform well on sequence-to-sequence tasks such as translation, where the input sequence and the output sequence can be different lengths. You can also scale and train this type of model to perform general text generation tasks. Examples of encoder-decoder models include BART as opposed to BERT and T5, the model that you'll use in the labs in this course. Finally, decoder-only models are some of the most commonly used today. Again, as they have scaled, their capabilities have grown. These models can now generalize to most tasks. Popular decoder-only models include the GPT family of models, BLOOM, Jurassic, LLaMA, and many more. You'll learn more about these different varieties of transformers and how they are trained later this week. That was quite a lot. The main goal of this overview of transformer models is to give you enough background to understand the differences between the various models being used out in the world and to be able to read model documentation. I want to emphasize that you don't need to worry about remembering all the details you've seen here, as you can come back to this explanation as often as you need. Remember that you'll be interacting with transformer models through natural language, creating prompts using written words, not code. You don't need to understand all of the details of the underlying architecture to do this. This is called prompt engineering, and that's what you'll explore in the next part of this course. Let's move on to the next video to learn more
------------------------------------------------------------------
prompting and prompt engineering 


Okay, Just to remind you of some of the terminology. The text that you feed into the model is called the prompt, the act of generating text is known as inference, and the output text is known as the completion. The full amount of text or the memory that is available to use for the prompt is called the context window. Although the example here shows the model performing well, you'll frequently encounter situations where the model doesn't produce the outcome that you want on the first try. You may have to revise the language in your prompt or the way that it's written several times to get the model to behave in the way that you want. This work to develop and improve the prompt is known as prompt engineering. This is a big topic. But one powerful strategy to get the model to produce better outcomes is to include examples of the task that you want the model to carry out inside the prompt. Providing examples inside the context window is called in-context learning. Let's take a look at what this term means. With in-context learning, you can help LLMs learn more about the task being asked by including examples or additional data in the prompt. Here is a concrete example. Within the prompt shown here, you ask the model to classify the sentiment of a review. So whether the review of this movie is positive or negative, the prompt consists of the instruction, "Classify this review," followed by some context, which in this case is the review text itself, and an instruction to produce the sentiment at the end. This method, including your input data within the prompt, is called zero-shot inference. The largest of the LLMs are surprisingly good at this, grasping the task to be completed and returning a good answer. In this example, the model correctly identifies the sentiment as positive. Smaller models, on the other hand, can struggle with this. Here's an example of a completion generated by GPT-2, an earlier smaller version of the model that powers ChatGPT. As you can see, the model doesn't follow the instruction. While it does generate text with some relation to the prompt, the model can't figure out the details of the task and does not identify the sentiment. This is where providing an example within the prompt can improve performance. Here you can see that the prompt text is longer and now starts with a completed example that demonstrates the tasks to be carried out to the model. After specifying that the model should classify the review, the prompt text includes a sample review. I loved this movie, followed by a completed sentiment analysis. In this case, the review is positive. Next, the prompt states the instruction again and includes the actual input review that we want the model to analyze. You pass this new longer prompt to the smaller model, which now has a better chance of understanding the task you're specifying and the format of the response that you want. The inclusion of a single example is known as one-shot inference, in contrast to the zero-shot prompt you supplied earlier. Sometimes a single example won't be enough for the model to learn what you want it to do. So you can extend the idea of giving a single example to include multiple examples. This is known as few-shot inference. Here, you're working with an even smaller model that failed to carry out good sentiment analysis with one-shot inference. Instead, you're going to try few-shot inference by including a second example. This time, a negative review, including a mix of examples with different output classes can help the model to understand what it needs to do. You pass the new prompts to the model. And this time it understands the instruction and generates a completion that correctly identifies the sentiment of the review as negative. So to recap, you can engineer your prompts to encourage the model to learn by examples. While the largest models are good at zero-shot inference with no examples, smaller models can benefit from one-shot or few-shot inference that include examples of the desired behavior. But remember the context window because you have a limit on the amount of in-context learning that you can pass into the model. Generally, if you find that your model isn't performing well when, say, including five or six examples, you should try fine-tuning your model instead. Fine-tuning performs additional training on the model using new data to make it more capable of the task you want it to perform. You'll explore fine-tuning in detail in week 2 of this course. As larger and larger models have been trained, it's become clear that the ability of models to perform multiple tasks and how well they perform those tasks depends strongly on the scale of the model. As you heard earlier in the lesson, models with more parameters are able to capture more understanding of language. The largest models are surprisingly good at zero-shot inference and are able to infer and successfully complete many tasks that they were not specifically trained to perform. In contrast, smaller models are generally only good at a small number of tasks. Typically, those that are similar to the task that they were trained on. You may have to try out a few models to find the right one for your use case. Once you've found the model that is working for you, there are a few settings that you can experiment with to influence the structure and style of the completions that the model generates. Let's take a look at some of these configuration settings in the next video.
----------------------------------------------------------------
generative configuration

What are some of the methods and configuration parameters that can influence the behavior of a large language model during next-word generation?
How does random sampling differ from greedy decoding in the context of language model output generation?
What are the top k and top p sampling techniques, and how do they help limit random sampling while generating sensible output?
How does the temperature parameter affect the randomness of the model's output in language generation?
What are some ways to improve the performance of large language models through prompt engineering and inference configuration?

In this video, you'll examine some of the methods and associated configuration parameters that you can use to influence the way that the model makes the final decision about next-word generation. If you've used LLMs in playgrounds such as on the Hugging Face website or an AWS, you might have been presented with controls like these to adjust how the LLM behaves. Each model exposes a set of configuration parameters that can influence the model's output during inference. Note that these are different than the training parameters which are learned during training time. Instead, these configuration parameters are invoked at inference time and give you control over things like the maximum number of tokens in the completion, and how creative the output is. Max new tokens is probably the simplest of these parameters, and you can use it to limit the number of tokens that the model will generate. You can think of this as putting a cap on the number of times the model will go through the selection process. Here you can see examples of max new tokens being set to 100, 150, or 200. But note how the length of the completion in the example for 200 is shorter. This is because another stop condition was reached, such as the model predicting and end of sequence token. Remember it's max new tokens, not a hard number of new tokens generated. The output from the transformer's softmax layer is a probability distribution across the entire dictionary of words that the model uses. Here you can see a selection of words and their probability score next to them. Although we are only showing four words here, imagine that this is a list that carries on to the complete dictionary. Most large language models by default will operate with so-called greedy decoding. This is the simplest form of next-word prediction, where the model will always choose the word with the highest probability. This method can work very well for short generation but is susceptible to repeated words or repeated sequences of words. If you want to generate text that's more natural, more creative and avoids repeating words, you need to use some other controls. Random sampling is the easiest way to introduce some variability. Instead of selecting the most probable word every time with random sampling, the model chooses an output word at random using the probability distribution to weight the selection. For example, in the illustration, the word banana has a probability score of 0.02. With random sampling, this equates to a 2% chance that this word will be selected. By using this sampling technique, we reduce the likelihood that words will be repeated. However, depending on the setting, there is a possibility that the output may be too creative, producing words that cause the generation to wander off into topics or words that just don't make sense. Note that in some implementations, you may need to disable greedy and enable random sampling explicitly. For example, the Hugging Face transformers implementation that we use in the lab requires that we set do sample to equal true. Let's explore top k and top p sampling techniques to help limit the random sampling and increase the chance that the output will be sensible. Two Settings, top p and top k are sampling techniques that we can use to help limit the random sampling and increase the chance that the output will be sensible. To limit the options while still allowing some variability, you can specify a top k value which instructs the model to choose from only the k tokens with the highest probability. In this example here, k is set to three, so you're restricting the model to choose from these three options. The model then selects from these options using the probability weighting and in this case, it chooses donut as the next word. This method can help the model have some randomness while preventing the selection of highly improbable completion words. This in turn makes your text generation more likely to sound reasonable and to make sense. Alternatively, you can use the top p setting to limit the random sampling to the predictions whose combined probabilities do not exceed p. For example, if you set p to equal 0.3, the options are cake and donut since their probabilities of 0.2 and 0.1 add up to 0.3. The model then uses the random probability weighting method to choose from these tokens. With top k, you specify the number of tokens to randomly choose from, and with top p, you specify the total probability that you want the model to choose from. One more parameter that you can use to control the randomness of the model output is known as temperature. This parameter influences the shape of the probability distribution that the model calculates for the next token. Broadly speaking, the higher the temperature, the higher the randomness, and the lower the temperature, the lower the randomness. The temperature value is a scaling factor that's applied within the final softmax layer of the model that impacts the shape of the probability distribution of the next token. In contrast to the top k and top p parameters, changing the temperature actually alters the predictions that the model will make. If you choose a low value of temperature, say less than one, the resulting probability distribution from the softmax layer is more strongly peaked with the probability being concentrated in a smaller number of words. You can see this here in the blue bars beside the table, which show a probability bar chart turned on its side. Most of the probability here is concentrated on the word cake. The model will select from this distribution using random sampling and the resulting text will be less random and will more closely follow the most likely word sequences that the model learned during training. If instead you set the temperature to a higher value, say, greater than one, then the model will calculate a broader flatter probability distribution for the next token. Notice that in contrast to the blue bars, the probability is more evenly spread across the tokens. This leads the model to generate text with a higher degree of randomness and more variability in the output compared to a cool temperature setting. This can help you generate text that sounds more creative. If you leave the temperature value equal to one, this will leave the softmax function as default and the unaltered probability distribution will be used. You've covered a lot of ground so far. You've examined the types of tasks that LLMs are capable of performing and learned about transformers, the model architecture that powers these amazing tools. You've also explored how to get the best possible performance out of these models using prompt engineering and by experimenting with different inference configuration parameters. In the next video, you'll start building on this foundational knowledge by thinking through the
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pre-training large language models

In the previous video, you were introduced to the generative AI project life cycle. As you saw, there are a few steps to take before you can get to the fun part, launching your generative AI app. Once you have scoped out your use case, and determined how you'll need the LLM to work within your application, your next step is to select a model to work with. Your first choice will be to either work with an existing model, or train your own from scratch. There are specific circumstances where training your own model from scratch might be advantageous, and you'll learn about those later in this lesson. In general, however, you'll begin the process of developing your application using an existing foundation model. Many open-source models are available for members of the AI community like you to use in your application. The developers of some of the major frameworks for building generative AI applications like Hugging Face and PyTorch, have curated hubs where you can browse these models. A really useful feature of these hubs is the inclusion of model cards, that describe important details including the best use cases for each model, how it was trained, and known limitations. You'll find some links to these model hubs in the reading at the end of the week. The exact model that you'd choose will depend on the details of the task you need to carry out. Variance of the transformer model architecture are suited to different language tasks, largely because of differences in how the models are trained. To help you better understand these differences and to develop intuition about which model to use for a particular task, let's take a closer look at how large language models are trained. With this knowledge in hand, you'll find it easier to navigate the model hubs and find the best model for your use case. To begin, let's take a high-level look at the initial training process for LLMs. This phase is often referred to as pre-training. As you saw in Lesson 1, LLMs encode a deep statistical representation of language. This understanding is developed during the models pre-training phase when the model learns from vast amounts of unstructured textual data. This can be gigabytes, terabytes, and even petabytes of text. This data is pulled from many sources, including scrapes off the Internet and corpora of texts that have been assembled specifically for training language models. In this self-supervised learning step, the model internalizes the patterns and structures present in the language. These patterns then enable the model to complete its training objective, which depends on the architecture of the model, as you'll see shortly. During pre-training, the model weights get updated to minimize the loss of the training objective. The encoder generates an embedding or vector representation for each token. Pre-training also requires a large amount of compute and the use of GPUs. Note, when you scrape training data from public sites such as the Internet, you often need to process the data to increase quality, address bias, and remove other harmful content. As a result of this data quality curation, often only 1-3% of tokens are used for pre-training. You should consider this when you estimate how much data you need to collect if you decide to pre-train your own model. Earlier this week, you saw that there were three variance of the transformer model; encoder-only encoder-decoder models, and decode-only. Each of these is trained on a different objective, and so learns how to carry out different tasks. Encoder-only models are also known as Autoencoding models, and they are pre-trained using masked language modeling. Here, tokens in the input sequence or randomly mask, and the training objective is to predict the mask tokens in order to reconstruct the original sentence. This is also called a denoising objective. Autoencoding models spilled bi-directional representations of the input sequence, meaning that the model has an understanding of the full context of a token and not just of the words that come before. Encoder-only models are ideally suited to task that benefit from this bi-directional contexts. You can use them to carry out sentence classification tasks, for example, sentiment analysis or token-level tasks like named entity recognition or word classification. Some well-known examples of an autoencoder model are BERT and RoBERTa. Now, let's take a look at decoder-only or autoregressive models, which are pre-trained using causal language modeling. Here, the training objective is to predict the next token based on the previous sequence of tokens. Predicting the next token is sometimes called full language modeling by researchers. Decoder-based autoregressive models, mask the input sequence and can only see the input tokens leading up to the token in question. The model has no knowledge of the end of the sentence. The model then iterates over the input sequence one by one to predict the following token. In contrast to the encoder architecture, this means that the context is unidirectional. By learning to predict the next token from a vast number of examples, the model builds up a statistical representation of language. Models of this type make use of the decoder component off the original architecture without the encoder. Decoder-only models are often used for text generation, although larger decoder-only models show strong zero-shot inference abilities, and can often perform a range of tasks well. Well known examples of decoder-based autoregressive models are GBT and BLOOM. The final variation of the transformer model is the sequence-to-sequence model that uses both the encoder and decoder parts off the original transformer architecture. The exact details of the pre-training objective vary from model to model. A popular sequence-to-sequence model T5, pre-trains the encoder using span corruption, which masks random sequences of input tokens. Those mass sequences are then replaced with a unique Sentinel token, shown here as x. Sentinel tokens are special tokens added to the vocabulary, but do not correspond to any actual word from the input text. The decoder is then tasked with reconstructing the mask token sequences auto-regressively. The output is the Sentinel token followed by the predicted tokens. You can use sequence-to-sequence models for translation, summarization, and question-answering. They are generally useful in cases where you have a body of texts as both input and output. Besides T5, which you'll use in the labs in this course, another well-known encoder-decoder model is BART, not bird. To summarize, here's a quick comparison of the different model architectures and the targets off the pre-training objectives. Autoencoding models are pre-trained using masked language modeling. They correspond to the encoder part of the original transformer architecture, and are often used with sentence classification or token classification. Autoregressive models are pre-trained using causal language modeling. Models of this type make use of the decoder component of the original transformer architecture, and often used for text generation. Sequence-to-sequence models use both the encoder and decoder part off the original transformer architecture. The exact details of the pre-training objective vary from model to model. The T5 model is pre-trained using span corruption. Sequence-to-sequence models are often used for translation, summarization, and question-answering. Now that you have seen how this different model architectures are trained and the specific tasks they are well-suited to, you can select the type of model that is best suited to your use case. One additional thing to keep in mind is that larger models of any architecture are typically more capable of carrying out their tasks well. Researchers have found that the larger a model, the more likely it is to work as you needed to without additional in-context learning or further training. This observed trend of increased model capability with size has driven the development of larger and larger models in recent years. This growth has been fueled by inflection points and research, such as the introduction of the highly scalable transformer architecture, access to massive amounts of data for training, and the development of more powerful compute resources. This steady increase in model size actually led some researchers to hypothesize the existence of a new Moore's law for LLMs. Like them, you may be asking, can we just keep adding parameters to increase performance and make models smarter? Where could this model growth lead? While this may sound great, it turns out that training these enormous models is difficult and very expensive, so much so that it may be infeasible to continuously train larger and larger models. Let's take a closer look at some of the challenges associated with training large models in the next video.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Computational challenges of training LLMs

One of the most common issues you still counter when you try to train large language models is running out of memory. If you've ever tried training or even just loading your model on Nvidia GPUs, this error message might look familiar. CUDA, short for Compute Unified Device Architecture, is a collection of libraries and tools developed for Nvidia GPUs. Libraries such as PyTorch and TensorFlow use CUDA to boost performance on metrics multiplication and other operations common to deep learning. You'll encounter these out-of-memory issues because most LLMs are huge, and require a ton of memory to store and train all of their parameters. Let's do some quick math to develop intuition about the scale of the problem. A single parameter is typically represented by a 32-bit float, which is a way computers represent real numbers. You'll see more details about how numbers gets stored in this format shortly. A 32-bit float takes up four bytes of memory. So to store one billion parameters you'll need four bytes times one billion parameters, or four gigabyte of GPU RAM at 32-bit full precision. This is a lot of memory, and note, if only accounted for the memory to store the model weights so far. If you want to train the model, you'll have to plan for additional components that use GPU memory during training. These include two Adam optimizer states, gradients, activations, and temporary variables needed by your functions. This can easily lead to 20 extra bytes of memory per model parameter. In fact, to account for all of these overhead during training, you'll actually require approximately 6 times the amount of GPU RAM that the model weights alone take up. To train a one billion parameter model at 32-bit full precision, you'll need approximately 24 gigabyte of GPU RAM. This is definitely too large for consumer hardware, and even challenging for hardware used in data centers, if you want to train with a single processor. What options do you have to reduce the memory required for training? One technique that you can use to reduce the memory is called quantization. The main idea here is that you reduce the memory required to store the weights of your model by reducing their precision from 32-bit floating point numbers to 16-bit floating point numbers, or eight-bit integer numbers. The corresponding data types used in deep learning frameworks and libraries are FP32 for 32-bit full position, FP16, or Bfloat16 for 16-bit half precision, and int8 eight-bit integers. The range of numbers you can represent with FP32 goes from approximately -3*10^38 to 3*10^38. By default, model weights, activations, and other model parameters are stored in FP32. Quantization statistically projects the original 32-bit floating point numbers into a lower precision space, using scaling factors calculated based on the range of the original 32-bit floating point numbers. Let's look at an example. Suppose you want to store a PI to six decimal places in different positions. Floating point numbers are stored as a series of bits zeros and ones. The 32 bits to store numbers in full precision with FP32 consist of one bit for the sign where zero indicates a positive number, and one a negative number. Then eight bits for the exponent of the number, and 23 bits representing the fraction of the number. The fraction is also referred to as the mantissa, or significant. It represents the precision bits off the number. If you convert the 32-bit floating point value back to a decimal value, you notice the slight loss in precision. For reference, here's the real value of Pi to 19 decimal places. Now, let's see what happens if you project this FP32 representation of Pi into the FP16, 16-bit lower precision space. The 16 bits consists of one bit for the sign, as you saw for FP32, but now FP16 only assigns five bits to represent the exponent and 10 bits to represent the fraction. Therefore, the range of numbers you can represent with FP16 is vastly smaller from negative 65,504 to positive 65,504. The original FP32 value gets projected to 3.140625 in the 16-bit space. Notice that you lose some precision with this projection. There are only six places after the decimal point now. You'll find that this loss in precision is acceptable in most cases because you're trying to optimize for memory footprint. Storing a value in FP32 requires four bytes of memory. In contrast, storing a value on FP16 requires only two bytes of memory, so with quantization you have reduced the memory requirement by half. The AI research community has explored ways to optimize16-bit quantization. One datatype in particular BFLOAT16, has recently become a popular alternative to FP16. BFLOAT16, short for Brain Floating Point Format developed at Google Brain has become a popular choice in deep learning. Many LLMs, including FLAN-T5, have been pre-trained with BFLOAT16. BFLOAT16 or BF16 is a hybrid between half precision FP16 and full precision FP32. BF16 significantly helps with training stability and is supported by newer GPU's such as NVIDIA's A100. BFLOAT16 is often described as a truncated 32-bit float, as it captures the full dynamic range of the full 32-bit float, that uses only 16-bits. BFLOAT16 uses the full eight bits to represent the exponent, but truncates the fraction to just seven bits. This not only saves memory, but also increases model performance by speeding up calculations. The downside is that BF16 is not well suited for integer calculations, but these are relatively rare in deep learning. For completeness let's have a look at what happens if you quantize Pi from the 32-bit into the even lower precision eight bit space. If you use one bit for the sign INT8 values are represented by the remaining seven bits. This gives you a range to represent numbers from negative 128 to positive 127 and unsurprisingly Pi gets projected two or three in the 8-bit lower precision space. This brings new memory requirement down from originally four bytes to just one byte, but obviously results in a pretty dramatic loss of precision. Let's summarize what you've learned here and emphasize the key points you should take away from this discussion. Remember that the goal of quantization is to reduce the memory required to store and train models by reducing the precision off the model weights. Quantization statistically projects the original 32-bit floating point numbers into lower precision spaces using scaling factors calculated based on the range of the original 32-bit floats. Modern deep learning frameworks and libraries support quantization-aware training, which learns the quantization scaling factors during the training process. The details of this process are beyond the scope of this course. But you've seen the key point here, that you can use quantization to reduce the memory footprint off the model during training. BFLOAT16 has become a popular choice of precision in deep learning as it maintains the dynamic range of FP32, but reduces the memory footprint by half. Many LLMs, including FLAN-T5, have been pre-trained with BFOLAT16. Lookout for a mention of BFLOAT16 in next week's lab. Now let's return to the challenge of fitting models into GPU memory and take a look at the impact quantization can have. By applying quantization, you can reduce your memory consumption required to store the model parameters down to only two gigabyte using 16-bit half precision of 50% saving and you could further reduce the memory footprint by another 50% by representing the model parameters as eight bit integers, which requires only one gigabyte of GPU RAM. Note that in all these cases you still have a model with one billion parameters. As you can see, the circles representing the models are the same size. Quantization will give you the same degree of savings when it comes to training. However, many models now have sizes in excess of 50 billion or even 100 billion parameters. Meaning you'd need up to 500 times more memory capacity to train them, tens of thousands of gigabytes. These enormous models dwarf the one billion parameter model we've been considering, shown here to scale on the left. As modal scale beyond a few billion parameters, it becomes impossible to train them on a single GPU. Instead, you'll need to turn to distributed computing techniques while you train your model across multiple GPUs. This could require access to hundreds of GPUs, which is very expensive. Another reason why you won't pre-train your own model from scratch most of the time. However, an additional training process called fine-tuning, which you'll learn about next week. Also require storing all training parameters in memory and it's very likely you'll want to fine tune a model at some point. To help you understand more about the technical aspects of training across GPUs, we've prepared an optional video for you. It's very detailed, but it will help you understand some of the options that exist for developers like you to train larger models. You should feel free to skip this video. But if you're interested in learning more, I hope you'll check it out.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Scaling laws and compute-optimal models

What are the two options to achieve better performance in large language models?
What is the relationship between model size, training dataset size, and compute budget?
What is the definition of a petaFLOP per second day?
How does the Chinchilla paper suggest optimizing the training dataset size for a given model?
What are some findings from the Chinchilla paper regarding the performance of large language models?

In the last video, you explored some of the computational challenges of training large language models. Here you'll learn about research that has explored the relationship between model size, training, configuration and performance in an effort to determine just how big models need to be. Remember, the goal during pre-training is to maximize the model's performance of its learning objective, which is minimizing the loss when predicting tokens. Two options you have to achieve better performance are increasing the size of the dataset you train your model on and increasing the number of parameters in your model. In theory, you could scale either of both of these quantities to improve performance. However, another issue to take into consideration is your compute budget which includes factors like the number of GPUs you have access to and the time you have available for training models. To help you understand some of the discussion ahead, let's first define a unit of compute that quantifies the required resources. A petaFLOP per second day is a measurement of the number of floating point operations performed at a rate of one petaFLOP per second, running for an entire day. Note, one petaFLOP corresponds to one quadrillion floating point operations per second. When specifically thinking about training transformers, one petaFLOP per second day is approximately equivalent to eight NVIDIA V100 GPUs, operating at full efficiency for one full day. If you have a more powerful processor that can carry out more operations at once, then a petaFLOP per second day requires fewer chips. For example, two NVIDIA A100 GPUs give equivalent compute to the eight V100 chips. To give you an idea off the scale of these compute budgets, this chart shows a comparison off the petaFLOP per second days required to pre-train different variance of Bert and Roberta, which are both encoder only models. T5 and encoder-decoder model and GPT-3, which is a decoder only model. The difference between the models in each family is the number of parameters that were trained, ranging from a few hundred million for Bert base to 175 billion for the largest GPT-3 variant. Note that the y-axis is logarithmic. Each increment vertically is a power of 10. Here we see that T5 XL with three billion parameters required close to 100 petaFLOP per second days. While the larger GPT-3 175 billion parameter model required approximately 3,700 petaFLOP per second days. This chart makes it clear that a huge amount of computers required to train the largest models. You can see that bigger models take more compute resources to train and generally also require more data to achieve good performance. It turns out that they are actually well-defined relationships between these three scaling choices. Researchers have explored the trade-offs between training dataset size, model size and compute budget. Here's a figure from a paper by researchers at OpenAI that explores the impact of compute budget on model performance. The y-axis is the test loss, which you can consider as a proxy for model performance where smaller values are better. The x-axis is the compute budget in units of petaFLOP per second days. As you just saw, larger numbers can be achieved by either using more compute power or training for longer or both. Each thin blue line here shows the model loss over a single training run. Looking at where the loss starts to decline more slowly for each run, reveals a clear relationship between the compute budget and the model's performance. This can be approximated by a power-law relationship, shown by this pink line. A power law is a mathematical relationship between two variables, where one is proportional to the other raised to some power. When plotted on a graph where both axes are logarithmic, power-law relationships appear as straight lines. The relationship here holds as long as model size and training dataset size don't inhibit the training process. Taken at face value, this would suggest that you can just increase your compute budget to achieve better model performance. In practice however, the compute resources you have available for training will generally be a hard constraint set by factors such as the hardware you have access to, the time available for training and the financial budget of the project. If you hold your compute budget fixed, the two levers you have to improve your model's performance are the size of the training dataset and the number of parameters in your model. The OpenAI researchers found that these two quantities also show a power-law relationship with a test loss in the case where the other two variables are held fixed. This is another figure from the paper exploring the impact of training dataset size on model performance. Here, the compute budget and model size are held fixed and the size of the training dataset is vary. The graph shows that as the volume of training data increases, the performance of the model continues to improve. In the second graph, the compute budget and training dataset size are held constant. Models of varying numbers of parameters are trained. As the model increases in size, the test loss decreases indicating better performance. At this point you might be asking, what's the ideal balance between these three quantities? Well, it turns out a lot of people are interested in this question. Both research and industry communities have published a lot of empirical data for pre-training compute optimal models. In a paper published in 2022, a group of researchers led by Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud and Arthur Mensch carried out a detailed study of the performance of language models of various sizes and quantities of training data. The goal was to find the optimal number of parameters and volume of training data for a given compute budget. The author's name, the resulting compute optimal model, Chinchilla. This paper is often referred to as the Chinchilla paper. Let's take a look at some of their findings. The Chinchilla paper hints that many of the 100 billion parameter large language models like GPT-3 may actually be over parameterized, meaning they have more parameters than they need to achieve a good understanding of language and under trained so that they would benefit from seeing more training data. The authors hypothesized that smaller models may be able to achieve the same performance as much larger ones if they are trained on larger datasets. In this table, you can see a selection of models along with their size and information about the dataset they were trained on. One important takeaway from the Chinchilla paper is that the optimal training dataset size for a given model is about 20 times larger than the number of parameters in the model. Chinchilla was determined to be compute optimal. For a 70 billion parameter model, the ideal training dataset contains 1.4 trillion tokens or 20 times the number of parameters. The last three models in the table were trained on datasets that are smaller than the Chinchilla optimal size. These models may actually be under trained. In contrast, LLaMA was trained on a dataset size of 1.4 trillion tokens, which is close to the Chinchilla recommended number. Another important result from the paper is that the compute optimal Chinchilla model outperforms non compute optimal models such as GPT-3 on a large range of downstream evaluation tasks. With the results of the Chinchilla paper in hand teams have recently started to develop smaller models that achieved similar, if not better results than larger models that were trained in a non-optimal way. Moving forward, you can probably expect to see a deviation from the bigger is always better trends of the last few years as more teams or developers like you start to optimize their model design. The last model shown on this slide, Bloomberg GPT, is a really interesting model. It was trained in a compute optimal way following the Chinchilla loss and so achieves good performance with the size of 50 billion parameters. It's also an interesting example of a situation where pre-training a model from scratch was necessary to achieve good task performance. Let's move on to the last video of this week to discuss why.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pre-training for domain adaptation

What are some common use cases for Large Language Models (LLMs)?
How does the transformer architecture power LLMs?
What are some parameters that can be used at inference time to influence the output of LLMs?
What is the purpose of the pretraining phase in training LLMs?
What are some computational challenges in training LLMs?
How can scaling laws be used to design compute optimal models for LLMs?

​So far, I've emphasized that you'll generally work with an existing LLM as you develop your application. This saves you a lot of time and can get you to a working prototype much faster. However, there's one situation where you may find it necessary to pretrain your own model from scratch. If your target domain uses vocabulary and language structures that are not commonly used in day to day language. You may need to perform domain adaptation to achieve good model performance. For example, imagine you're a developer building an app to help lawyers and paralegals summarize legal briefs. Legal writing makes use of very specific terms like mens rea in the first example and res judicata in the second. These words are rarely used outside of the legal world, which means that they are unlikely to have appeared widely in the training text of existing LLMs. As a result, the models may have difficulty understanding these terms or using them correctly. Another issue is that legal language sometimes uses everyday words in a different context, like consideration in the third example. Which has nothing to do with being nice, but instead refers to the main element of a contract that makes the agreement enforceable. For similar reasons, you may face challenges if you try to use an existing LLM in a medical application. Medical language contains many uncommon words to describe medical conditions and procedures. And these may not appear frequently in training datasets consisting of web scrapes and book texts. Some domains also use language in a highly idiosyncratic way. This last example of medical language may just look like a string of random characters, but it's actually a shorthand used by doctors to write prescriptions. This text has a very clear meaning to a pharmacist, take one tablet by mouth four times a day, after meals and at bedtime. Because models learn their vocabulary and understanding of language through the original pretraining task. Pretraining your model from scratch will result in better models for highly specialized domains like law, medicine, finance or science. Now let's return to BloombergGPT, first announced in 2023 in a paper by Shijie Wu, Steven Lu, and colleagues at Bloomberg. BloombergGPT is an example of a large language model that has been pretrained for a specific domain, in this case, finance. The Bloomberg researchers chose to combine both finance data and general purpose tax data to pretrain a model that achieves Bestinclass results on financial benchmarks. While also maintaining competitive performance on general purpose LLM benchmarks. As such, the researchers chose data consisting of 51% financial data and 49% public data. In their paper, the Bloomberg researchers describe the model architecture in more detail. They also discuss how they started with a chinchilla scaling laws for guidance and where they had to make tradeoffs. These two graphs compare a number of LLMs, including BloombergGPT, to scaling laws that have been discussed by researchers. On the left, the diagonal lines trace the optimal model size in billions of parameters for a range of compute budgets. On the right, the lines trace the compute optimal training data set size measured in number of tokens. The dashed pink line on each graph indicates the compute budget that the Bloomberg team had available for training their new model. The pink shaded regions correspond to the compute optimal scaling loss determined in the Chinchilla paper. In terms of model size, you can see that BloombergGPT roughly follows the Chinchilla approach for the given compute budget of 1.3 million GPU hours, or roughly 230,000,000 petaflops. The model is only a little bit above the pink shaded region, suggesting the number of parameters is fairly close to optimal. However, the actual number of tokens used to pretrain BloombergGPT 569,000,000,000 is below the recommended Chinchilla value for the available compute budget. The smaller than optimal training data set is due to the limited availability of financial domain data. Showing that real world constraints may force you to make trade offs when pretraining your own models. Congratulations on making it to the end of week one, you've covered a lot of ground, so let's take a minute to recap what you've seen. Mike walked you through some of the common use cases for LLMs, such as essay writing, dialogue summarization and translation. He then gave a detailed presentation of the transformer architecture that powers these models. And discussed some of the parameters you can use at inference time to influence the model's output. He wrapped up by introducing you to a generative AI project lifecycle that you can use to plan and guide your application development work. Next, you saw how models are trained on vast amounts of text data during an initial training phase called pretraining. This is where models develop their understanding of language. You explored some of the computational challenges of training these models, which are significant. In practice because of GPU memory limitations, you will almost always use some form of quantization when training your models. You finish the week with a discussion of scaling laws that have been discovered for LLMs and how they can be used to design compute optimal models. If you'd like to read more of the details, be sure to check out this week's reading exercises.

